Feature #2863 initial conda recipe (#2900)
dtcenter/METplus: docs/Contributors_Guide/conda_recipe.rst

.. _cg_conda_recipe:

************
Conda Recipe
************

> Files used to create a Conda recipe can be found in **internal/scripts/conda**.

Reviewer: @georgemccabe could you please add a sentence or two about when/why a developer may want to build the conda environment locally? For example, to test adding to or modifying the conda build, add support for additional targets, or to debug a problem with an existing build.

* **meta.yaml** - defines what is included in the recipe,
  e.g. package name/version/info, source code URLs, build dependencies, etc.
  See the `Defining Metadata in the Conda Docs <https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda-build/en/stable/resources/define-metadata.html>`_ for more information.
* **build.sh** - shell script used to install the software (for Linux and MacOS)
* **conda_build_config.yaml** - defines build settings, e.g. compiler versions.
  See this `example <https://github.com/conda-forge/conda-forge-pinning-feedstock/blob/main/recipe/conda_build_config.yaml>`_.

Build Recipe Locally
====================

To build the recipe locally, use a clean Conda environment with the conda-build
and conda-index packages installed.

.. note::
    Other packages/libraries in this environment can impact what is used to
    install the software and can cause unexpected issues.

::

    conda create --name build_env
    conda activate build_env
    conda install -c conda-forge conda-build conda-index

.. note::
    It is recommended to also install conda-verify to verify the recipe, but
    as of the writing of these instructions, conda-verify was not supported for
    Python 3.12.

> Change directory to the **internal/scripts/conda** directory and build the recipe.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
From the top-level directory of the METplus repository, change directory to **internal/scripts/conda** and build the recipe.
```

.. _cg_conda_recipe:

************
Conda Recipe
************

Files used to create a Conda recipe can be found in **internal/scripts/conda**.
In the **recipe** directory are:

* **meta.yaml** - defines what is included in the recipe,
  e.g. package name/version/info, source code URLs, build dependencies, etc.
  See the `Defining Metadata in the Conda Docs <https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda-build/en/stable/resources/define-metadata.html>`_ for more information.
* **build.sh** - shell script used to install the software (for Linux and MacOS)
* **conda_build_config.yaml** - defines build settings, e.g. compiler versions.
  See this `example <https://github.com/conda-forge/conda-forge-pinning-feedstock/blob/main/recipe/conda_build_config.yaml>`_.

After making changes to a Conda recipe, it is recommended that developers
build the recipe locally, install it in a fresh Conda environment, and run
any tests that are not included in the recipe to ensure that everything works
as expected. Ideally, testing should be performed on a variety of platforms,
e.g. Linux and OSX.

Build Recipe Locally
====================

> To build the recipe locally, use a clean Conda environment with the conda-build

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To build the recipe locally, use a clean Conda environment with the *conda-build*
```

> and conda-index packages installed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and *conda-index* packages installed.
```

.. note::
    Other packages/libraries in this environment can impact what is used to
    install the software and can cause unexpected issues.

::

    conda create --name build_env
    conda activate build_env
    conda install -c conda-forge conda-build conda-index

.. note::
    It is recommended to also install conda-verify to verify the recipe, but
    as of the writing of these instructions, conda-verify was not supported for
    Python 3.12.

From the top-level directory of the METplus repository,
change directory to **internal/scripts/conda** and build the recipe.

> Be sure to specify the Conda Forge channel with `-c conda-forge` and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Be sure to specify the Conda Forge channel with :code:`-c conda-forge` and
```

> set `--error-overlinking` so the build errors to alert you of linking issues.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
set :code:`--error-overlinking` so the build errors provide alerts for linking issues.
```

> The `-k` option "keeps going" when running the tests instead of stopping at

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The :code:`-k` option "keeps going" when running the tests instead of stopping at
```

Example::

    mkdir /d1/personal/${USER}/my-test-channel

Create a directory in the channel directory that matches the OS name from the
previous step, e.g. linux-64.

Example::

    mkdir /d1/personal/${USER}/my-test-channel/linux-64

Copy the .tar.gz or .conda file from the previous step into this directory.

Example::

    cp /path/to/conda-bld/linux-64/metplus-6.0.0-py310h921d19a_0.tar.bz2 /d1/personal/${USER}/my-test-channel/linux-64/

Index the channel directory to create other necessary files.

Example::

    conda index /d1/personal/${USER}/my-test-channel

If successful, this command should create other files in the OS directory and
add a **noarch** directory.

Install package from local channel
==================================

Create another conda environment to install the package.
Make sure the Python version matches what is expected by the package.

Example::

    conda create --name test_build_met python=3.10

Activate the new environment::

    conda activate test_build_met

Install the **metplus** package, specifying the local channel::

    conda install -c file:///d1/personal/${USER}/my-test-channel metplus

Run tests
=========

> Test that the install was successful by calling a MET tool and the Run METplus

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Test that the install was successful by calling a MET tool and the :code:`run_metplus`
```

script::

    grid_stat
    run_metplus

> Use the *which* command to ensure that these files are being called from the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use the :code:`which` command to ensure that these files are being called from the
```

that corresponds to the MET version used in the Conda recipe.

Here is an example of running the MET unit tests from a Conda install::

    TEST_ENV=test_build_met
    export MET_TEST_INPUT=/home/${USER}/data/METplus/met_unit_test_input
    export MET_TEST_OUTPUT=/home/${USER}/data/METplus/met_test_output
    export MET_TEST_BASE=/home/${USER}/MET/internal/test_unit
    export MET_BASE=/home/${USER}/.conda/envs/${TEST_ENV}/share/met
    export MET_TEST_MET_PYTHON_EXE=/home/${USER}/.conda/envs/${TEST_ENV}/bin/python3
    cd ${MET_TEST_BASE}
    ./bin/unit_test.sh

Here is an example of running a METplus use case from a Conda install::

    run_metplus \
     ${METPLUS_PARM_BASE}/use_cases/met_tool_wrapper/GridStat/GridStat_python_embedding.conf \
     config.INPUT_BASE=/Users/mccabe/data/METplus_Data \
     config.OUTPUT_BASE=/Users/mccabe/data/metplus_test_out

Clean up
========

If modifications are needed to the recipe, be sure to switch back to the
Conda environment used to build/index the recipe before running those commands.
Remove the existing local channel and/or create a new local channel.
Uninstall *metplus* from the environment where it was installed before

> re-installing using `conda uninstall metplus`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
re-installing using :code:`conda uninstall metplus`.
```
